Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
H.J.
Marsh considers his timing quite fortunate, a 1945 high school graduate of Houston San Jacinto High School.
By the time he joined the Army, World War II was just about over.
But still he wanted to serve and the Army needed him in Korea.
His unit served occupational duty in postwar Korea.
While he says there was not much action at that time, his service was still valuable in keeping the peace that had been hard earned in the Pacific Theater.
Korea, after all, was under Japanese rule during the war.
And after the war, the split between North and South Korea was even more defined.
Matter of fact, H.J.
Marsh says it was then that he first heard the word communism during his service between World War II and the Korean War that started in 1950.
Please welcome H.J.
Marsh, a Bryan College Station resident
for more than 60 years to Veterans of the Valley.
You've been around a long time.
Yes, I have.
And you've seen a lot of changes in Bryan College Station in 60 years.
Very much so.
When I first came to Bryan, it was a two-lane blacktop right through town.
And there's a lot of space between Bryan and College Station.
Indeed.
That was after your service in 1947.
Yes, sir.
And I want to get to that.
But you were 17 years old when you joined the Army, and you made the decision to stay in high school because had you dropped out of high school, you probably would have been involved in the war, and you might not have ever gotten back to high school.
That's correct.
That's the reason I did it.
And when I turned 18 is when
Uncle Sam said, I want you.
So I went to the induction center there in Houston.
They said, go home, tell your mother goodbye, and be back here as quick as you can, because you're going.
Yes, sir.
And get your toothbrush.
Yes, correct.
You first had tried to get induction in the Navy, but you were colorblind.
Correct.
My daddy was in the Navy.
And I wanted to go in the Navy too.
My oldest son, by the way, he was a Vietnam veteran.
Right.
Gordon is his name?
Yes.
He was in the Navy.
And he served on a carrier.
Correct.
In the Navy.
I know you're very proud of that.
Very proud.
As all of your children.
And we'll talk about them after a while too.
Yes.
But a 17-year-old and you're taken to Fort Sam Houston for induction, that's got to be your thoughts at the time.
I mean, you're taken out of your comfort level, your comfort zone.
And you're just being ordered around.
What was that like for a 17-year-old kid?
I was kind of like millions of other young kids, you know, never been away from home, didn't know what it was like, didn't know what you were going to get into.
And it was a strange and scary situation, but, you know, they kept you so busy, you didn't have time to think too much.
Right, yeah, because you were up early?
You're doing drill?
Yes, sir.
You're learning how to be one of Uncle Sam's boys.
Correct.
Right.
And you went to Little Rock for basic, is that right?
Correct.
Camp Robinson, Arkansas.
Right.
And then you finished your training in California?
Correct.
Fort Worth, California.
Then they shipped me overseas.
Well, when I was on that troop ship going west, I looked at the Golden Gate Bridge from the underneath.
And I just thought to myself, Lord, I don't know whether I'll ever see that again, but let's go anyway.
We got about three days out of Frisco, and they finally opened the order to tell us where we was going.
And they said, we're going to Korea.
And I said, where in the world is Korea?
Never heard of it.
Right.
We found out where it was.
Your high school geography didn't specifically talk about where you were.
No, we didn't discuss that a whole lot.
No, sir.
How long did it take to get over there?
About 17 days.
We were on a troop ship.
We were double loaded.
Yeah.
And spent a lot of time on deck.
And taking a shower in salt water was funny.
Oh, we did lose one of our troops for, he died of spinal meningitis.
On the way over?
Yeah, and we had to stop in Okinawa to take him off.
Oh, how sad.
Yeah.
And then we continued on to Incheon, Korea.
And you talked about Incheon, it had no wharf, so you got a little battle tested there, so to speak, because you had to climb the ropes up to it.
Over the side, no landing nets, yes sir.
yeah off the lst correct in the landing nets did you know how to do that had that been part of your training no no no it said get off this thing now and start climbing and when you get off you'll be in inchon that's correct yeah you wound up there at a replacement center and eventually near the 38th parallel talk about sort of where your permanent home was well we spent a little time in chin chin that was right on the 38th parallel and then our orders
sent us to Wanju, which was a small outpost.
I was in a motor pool.
So I had a detachment of trucks and vehicles, and we did mostly liaison between the Koreans and the United States government.
We had a lot of courier duty that we had to take parcels, packets to different other outposts.
So it kept us busy.
We didn't have too much time to think about how cold it was.
Were you educated very much by your superiors about sort of what the world situation was then, post-World War II?
Why did we have to be in Korea?
What was happening up north with the Russians and the Communist Party starting to take hold?
Did you kind of know what was going on?
At the time, I guess, at 18 years old, you don't give too much thought to world politics and things like that.
You just knew you was over there to do a job and get back home as quick as you could.
So we didn't discuss politics a whole lot.
But the South Koreans, who had probably not their own choice, but had still been under the arm of the Japanese during World War II, but they were friendly people.
Yes, very friendly.
We didn't have any problem at all with the South Koreans.
In fact, they were real cooperative with us.
We got along well together.
I just felt sorry for them because they were so poor.
Right.
You talked about the children.
Yeah.
Poor little kids, you know, they starve.
I told you about the dogs.
I didn't see many dogs, but that's another.
Well, no, but that was part of the world situation, right?
Yes.
You knew what a dog was in the United States.
It was a pet.
But in Korea, it was dinner.
That's correct.
And for a 17-year-old kid, you're just not, you can't really grasp that.
I didn't comprehend that because I never had seen that before, you know.
Right.
The American people, Tom,
A lot of us don't realize how fortunate we are to be an American.
And it's something that I'm proud of.
And I hope that everybody that lives in this country is proud.
We've got a great country.
Talk about your job.
You're part of the motor pool.
You had to go out on courier duty.
Yes, sir.
There was one time you mentioned that you had to go out and sort of on a rescue mission of another year.
of another group that had broken down, and then you all broke down too, right?
Correct.
Over here, you know, 50 miles doesn't sound like very far, but over in a country like that, one-lane roads, mountains, no guardrails.
Takes a long time to drive 50 miles.
Right.
But we did.
We got about 50 miles up in the mountains, and our truck broke down, and it was cold.
Oh, I've never been so cold in my life.
This is the winter of 46, 47.
Correct.
And it was brutal.
20, 30, below zero.
I've never been that cold in my life and haven't been that cold since.
Right.
But we burned all the fuel that we had, all the liquid fuels.
Finally, didn't have anything else to burn.
Of course, everything was frozen, no wood.
You couldn't get wood.
So we just said, well, this might be it.
But finally the motor officer, of course after we'd been gone for four or five hours, he decided to come look for us because he got a radiogram that the other truck was okay.
And we should have been back.
And anyway, he came up and picked us up and brought us back to camp.
Thank goodness.
You were glad to see him.
Yeah, I could have hugged him.
Because he was going to take you someplace where it was warm.
Yes, sir.
Right.
You talked about it was so cold that there was one Jeep that was kept inside, and you used that Jeep to start all the other Jeeps.
That's correct.
The other jeeps wouldn't start because they were just so cold.
Correct.
And these are the jeeps that you needed to do your job as far as a courier and doing the other things.
Well, jeeps, we had jeeps, weapons, carriers, six by sixes.
And all the heavy.
Of course, the 7th Division, which we were kind of attached to, the other ones that had the artillery and stuff.
Right, right.
I remember one time, one of the trucks was going down a hill.
made a sharp turn.
It was loaded with 75 caliber field artillery ammo.
And it turned over.
And those shells went flying every which way.
And of course, we didn't know at the time that you have to have an arm and pin in a shell before it go off.
But we were heading for the hills, trying to get away from them shells.
But that was one of those deals.
Those roads were awful.
I mean, no guard rails or anything like that.
I guess there were times you thought
We got to go over the side or?
And when we were up in the mountains and if we'd meet another Korean truck, we'd get as close as we could to the mountain.
Right.
And then we'd make them go around the outside.
And sometimes it wasn't but that much space, you know, between the wheels and the... And as I said, there's some of those cliffs that are 2,000 feet deep.
Oh, my goodness.
But...
Now, to keep the motor pool going, sometimes you needed requisition supplies.
Yes, we did.
And if we couldn't get them, my motor officer told me, he said, Sergeant, get us a weapons carrier ready.
We're going to Seoul, and we're going to do a requisition.
I said, yes, sir.
That's what we're going to do.
He said, we're going to get them parts we have to have.
We're going to wait till all them boys go to lunch, and we're going to go in there and requisition some parts.
So that's what we did.
And I hope the statute of limitations on theft of military equipment doesn't pass.
Ladies and gentlemen, meet Radar O'Reilly, the original here.
You got to do what you have to do.
You had to.
It was a matter of survival.
Yes, we had to keep them trucks running.
Right.
You talked about one of the things that bothered you, though, was the poverty.
just what they didn't have, the kids, the kids living in poverty.
Even in mid-40s Houston, Texas, people had a home, had homes, had jobs, had food on the table.
This is a totally different type of thing.
I never had experienced it before.
It really upset me.
That sort of thing upset me worse than being over there.
We used to take garbage out to the dump.
and these little kids would see us coming.
And we'd be kicking that garbage out the tailgate of the truck, and those little kids would pick up cans and scoop anything they could get out of those cans to eat it, you know.
Right, right.
Years and years after that, I'd get mad at somebody that left something on a plate and didn't eat it all.
You said you weren't too aware of politics, but as we mentioned in the opening, it was the first time that you'd heard the word communism.
And you knew that the people on the north side of the parallel were guided by the communists.
That's correct.
Dictated by the communists.
And they'd come over to the south and cause some trouble.
They would.
Talk about that.
They'd send raiding parties over there and try to steal.
They'd hijack a truck every once in a while and steal whatever it was on its supplies.
Right.
Yeah.
But we knew that the north was...
bad guys, and they were communists, so communists had to be bad.
Yeah.
Talk about some of these courier trips.
You touched on it earlier, but some of these trips, it would be 50 miles, they'd be six or seven hour ordeals, right?
Because they're so rough roads, icy roads.
Yeah.
It's just hard to travel, especially in a big truck.
Kang Nun Mountain, I think you said, was... 260-something curves in it.
And it took a long time to get from top to bottom.
In the wind?
We were stuck at the top, the wind blowing 60 or 70 miles an hour and the snow chain got tangled up in the tie rod end of my little Jeep.
And I had to get out and untangle it.
And I had to hold onto the Jeep to keep from getting blown off the mountain.
And there was a 2,000 foot drop and that was the only time I was a bit nervous.
It makes me nervous just hearing that.
We've got three or four pictures here I want you to see of young Sergeant Marsh.
And I look at that picture and I think, I bet you didn't have any trouble getting the date.
That's a good looking young soldier right there.
That's right when you enlisted, when you were about 17 or 18.
Let's see, I was a tech sergeant.
I was probably about, with all of...
Don't hold me to this fall of 46.
I was, they call that a tech sergeant.
Yeah, so you just turned 18 or something like that.
T-5.
Yeah.
I was a T-5 back then.
Now you're on the left, and that's a Bryan native on the right.
Who is that?
That's right.
Joe Bartas.
He was in the floor covering business here in Bryan.
Right.
He just done the part with us.
He was a fine, good friend.
He did a lot of work for me.
We just had a good time together, you know, talking about old times.
Right.
Where was this taking?
That's in Fort Ord, California.
That's the old barracks we used to stay in back in the old days.
That's you being lifted up by somebody you probably don't remember, right?
I don't know what he was doing.
He was about 45 years old.
I don't know how he got in there, but anyway, volunteered.
So there was some fun.
Who's in this?
You're on the left.
Do you know who the other people are?
I don't remember.
One of them, the one at the bottom, I think his name was Klein, and the one with his shirt open, I forget what his name was.
Right.
Sixty-some years.
Does things to your memory, Tom.
Tell me about that.
I know about that.
Yes, sir.
You came home in 1947.
Correct.
In the spring of 1947.
before the Korean War had broken out in 1950.
And coming back was an ordeal too.
You were laid up for 11 days on the boat coming back, right?
I was on sick bay.
Well, I got a cold before my shipping date.
And they told me that if you miss the ship, it might be six months before there's another ship to bring me home.
And I knew I wouldn't go away six months.
So I held on and
Kept getting worse and worse and worse.
So finally, in time to board the ship, and I made it aboard the ship.
And as soon as I heard the props turning, I went to the sick call.
And I was there 11 days with acute severe bronchitis.
You came back.
They wanted you to re-up.
You said, no, you pretty much had your deal.
And they said, well, we'll let you out tomorrow if you join the reserves.
And this was April of 47.
That's correct.
And I said, I'll take that deal.
Three-year hitch in the reserves.
That's correct.
And again, we talked about the timing of it all.
Because April of 47, you were out in April of 50, and Korea started two months later.
June of 50, that's correct.
In June of 1950.
So you missed World War II and you missed Korea.
Yeah, I called them and asked them if my enlistment was still, I mean, my time in reserve was still active.
And they said, no, you're done with us.
We'll call you.
We'll call you for need you.
Okay.
Well, you think back to your fortune as far as being able to survive that time.
Had Truman not decided to drop the bomb, obviously World War II would have gone on longer.
There would have been a ground war in Japan.
A lot of people don't realize, Tom, at that time, the Japanese knew that if we ever invaded them, it was going to be to the last man.
And in the summer of 1945, they were making plans for the Army and what they were going to do when they invaded Japan.
And I was in that period, time period, that they knew that I was one of the ones that were going to go to Japan.
And a lot of people don't realize that Harry Truman did a real great service.
I mean, he killed a lot of Japanese and said, you know.
but we would have killed hundreds of thousands of Americans.
Because those people were fanatics.
You might remember during the Pacific campaign, we had to burn them out of those caves because they wouldn't come out.
And that was their philosophy, fight to the death.
We would have had a loss of life that was
Well, let's say we lost 400 and some odd thousand killed in World War II.
Right.
There'd been another.
Yeah.
Who knows?
Who knows how many?
Most veterans I've talked to agree with that sentiment.
Correct.
Completely.
Yes, sir.
So you were out in April of, you were actually, you joined the reserves in April of 1947, and you decided to come to Bryan.
You had a high school girlfriend that you wanted to, that was in Bryan at the time.
And you and she were married and had two children and later divorced.
But you came to Bryan and you went to work for the bank.
Well, you went to A&M for a semester, right?
One semester at A&M.
So I'm a former student.
You are a former student.
One semester at A&M.
Got expensive to go to school at that time.
So you decided to get out and go to work.
And you worked for eight years for First National Bank.
First National Bank.
Yes, sir.
Right.
And you met Gladys.
That's correct.
At First National Bank.
1956, you married Gladys.
That's correct.
Been married ever since.
53 of them.
She's part of every success that you have, right?
If it wasn't for her, I wouldn't be here.
Talk about your time in Bryant College Station.
I mean, over 60 years.
And you're a salesman.
You sold insurance for Prudential, I believe.
I retired from the Prudential Insurance Company.
Right.
You went out on your own, sold some insurance, sold some real estate.
So you met a lot of people in Bryant College Station.
You know a lot of the history and the
and the old families of Bryan College Station.
I have been really fortunate to have had the opportunity to meet the people that I have.
One is Travis Bryan Jr., one of the finest Christians, finest men I ever met.
And of course he is today one of my best friends.
Indeed.
Then I met William Dudley Fitch.
The Lake Mr. Pitch.
I had the pleasure of meeting him on a couple of occasions also.
Yes, sir.
I was out in his house one afternoon.
See, back in the early 60s, this was 1960 or 61, Glade Street ended right there at Southwest Parkway.
And he said, H.J., you got a minute?
I said, yes, sir, I got a minute for you, Bill.
He said, let's get in a drink.
I want to show you something.
So we went back across the field and pointed out there and he said, see over there?
He said, I gave the city of College Station the land to build a new house.
And that's where it's going to be.
Right out there in the country.
And that's where it is today.
2818.
Of course, he was a brilliant, brilliant individual.
He had foresight to
look into the future and tell what it was going to be.
And he developed the major parts of College Station during his lifetime.
Right, right.
And with the help of Travis Bryant.
A lot of the great families and the great names.
Yes.
You've seen a lot of changes.
I think you said you and Gladys lived in about 15 houses in Bryant College Station.
Well, I used to, yeah, we had wheels on all our furniture.
I was a swapper and a trader, and I liked to... I met Bill Scaster was another friend, and I had a long association with him, and he and I worked some business deals together, house deals and things like that, so that was one of the reasons I hadn't bought and sold so many houses.
Now you say you had two sons and two daughters, right?
Correct.
Two sons and two daughters.
You and Gladys had two daughters.
Your two sons were both in the framing contracting business.
That's correct.
One in Fort Worth, one in Georgia.
My son David is in Fort Worth and Gordon lives in Gainesville, Georgia.
Right.
And he's a Vietnam veteran.
He's a Vietnam veteran.
Right, right.
He served, I guess, off the coast on a carrier.
Is that right?
Yes, he's also a life member of our post.
Right.
What was his job in the Navy?
I mean, he served on the carrier.
Was he a flyer?
He was a records keeper.
I see.
Maintenance records and different things like records.
He wasn't a pilot.
He wasn't a...
Yeah, but he served on the carrier during Vietnam.
Yes, he did.
So he's a veteran.
I think Gladys reminded us correctly that you all have six grandchildren and one great-grandchild on the way.
Is that right?
I think that's the number.
We were kind of bantering about a number sort of back and forth, and I think we came up with six.
And you've got a grandchild that's on the way, a great-grandchild.
Her arrival date is about November.
About November.
Yes, sir.
Yeah, yeah.
So Bryan College Station, I can't conceive of some 61, 62 years in this town and really sort of just the changes you've seen.
I mean, we've had the revitalization lately of downtown Bryan.
I guess you could remember downtown Bryan when the streets were there, but all the stores were there.
I remember downtown Bryan when the old Charles Hotel was there.
Yeah.
the old LaSalle, and then there's a lot of small little store, Lester's, Beverly Braley's.
Edges.
Yeah.
This is many of them.
Of course, my memory's not as good as it used to be either.
Right, right.
But you sold up until about five years ago, right, when you were sort of taking it easy from there?
Yes, I finally decided that I'd let somebody else...
and do the selling job and watch them.
One of your involvements is with the local VFW 4692 with the VFW.
I know you enjoy your involvement with that and those people.
I always try to stay active.
I've helped them in a lot of projects.
I've helped them do a lot of things.
I've always volunteered to work whatever it was that needed working.
So we've got a good organization
I think that a lot of members, a lot of people that are veterans of foreign wars that are not members of our post, and I strongly urge them to come out and apply because we need to.
Well, we've talked about that because there's another generation coming up that needs to keep the VFW and the memories of the veterans who served in foreign wars and all veterans, whether it's VFW, American Legion, whatever.
They need to come up because the Vietnam veterans and the Desert Storm veterans, they need to get involved.
Iraq and Afghanistan.
Sure.
There's a lot to be offered, you know, to be a... It's a pride of being a member of the Veterans of Foreign Wars.
Indeed.
Well, we thank you for your service, and we're glad that you did what you did, and it was an important, important service for our country.
Well, I always, like I said,
I tried to do the best I could, and whatever they said, well, let's do it.
You did your job.
Let's do it the best way we can know how.
H.J., thank you.
You bet.
It's been a pleasure.
Yes, sir.
Our country has been served not just by those who went in harm's way, but by those who, through their volunteering to serve, stood ready at all times, did their jobs in uniform, and then came home to serve their family and their community.
And we salute Sergeant H.J.
Marsh for his such service.
I'm Tom Turberville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.